---
title: "Analysis of Artificial Intelligence: Can AI be Controlled?"
categories: essay
layout: single
author: Aanya Malashetti
author_profile: true
read_time: true

permalink: /spring2021/ai-essay/
---

Artificial intelligence (AI) is the ability for machines to mimic the perception, problem-solving, critical thinking, and learning often displayed by humans. In simpler terms, the idea behind AI is giving electronic machines the ability to think like the smartest organic living things on the planet. AI is often considered a futuristic concept, shrouded in convoluting mystery, complex science, and sometimes subtle fear. While nowhere yet near its full capacity, many people often wonder about AI’s potential. Those speculations have a wide scope, with arguments ranging from the outright calamitous to the bleakly hopeful. What both sides of the argument agree on, however, is that AI is growing at a surprising rate, and that its potential right now seems to be limitless.

The most common interpretation of AI seems to be in the form of superintelligent, cognizant forms, whether it simply be computers, or more human-like robots. In this essay, I will be analyzing two New York Times opinion pieces by Stuart Russel and Melanie Mitchell respectively, and comparing them to a fiction story: Mika Model, by Paolo Bacigalupi. While Russel warns the readers explicitly and urgently about the dangers of AI’s continued rapid development, Mitchell encourages them to reconsider their often ‘flawed intuition’ about intelligent machines. Bacigalupi’s Mika Model compares both these opinions through the interactions between a robot, Mika, and a human detective, Rivera.

Both New York Times opinion pieces agree on the fact that AI has largely untapped potential, the scope of which remains somewhat unknown even to the most knowledgeable professionals in the field. Both Russel and Mitchell are in fact professors of computer science at Berkeley and Portland State, respectively. Mitchell acknowledges that AI is often thought of as ‘pure intelligence’ without any ‘cognitive shortcomings of humans.’ The adjective ‘pure’ effectively characterizes AI to have undiluted, superior capabilities, something that is almost impossible for humans to compare to. Furthermore, representing human cognition as a ‘shortcoming’ not only adds to this powerful characterization, but further diminishes human capability in comparison. Additionally, Russel highlights AI’s potential for farsightedness, writing that AI will be able to code ‘pre-emptive[ly]’, emphasizing their extraordinary potential.

Where Russel and Mitchell’s opinions fundamentally differ, however, is the degree of influence that human intelligence, cognition, and ability will have on the development of AI. Russel believes AI to far surpass humans in every scenario, describing the ‘disastrous’ danger that a potential misalignment of aims might pose. Mitchell, however, questions the common assumption that AI will develop without a sense of cognition, instead believing that machines will learn and adapt in ‘human society and culture,’ thereby being ‘tempered in common sense and social judgment.’ She further states that AI without ‘human-like judgment’ might not come to be, going so far as to describe it to be a ‘myth.’ This not only conveys how far down the rabbit hole of science fiction a layman’s understanding of AI is, but also puts a tether on the seemingly uncontrollable nature of its development.

Another key difference between the two authors is their view on the objectives of superintelligent AI. While Russel believes implementing measures to ‘control’ AI to be vitally crucial for safety, Mitchell believes this to be almost unnecessary because all intelligence has to be developed from societal integration and so will have tempered judgment.

Russell’s repetitive use of the word ‘control’ highlights his central point about how controlling AI is the best way to ensure a safe future of technological development. By discussing the responsibility of ‘decision-making’, Russel’s use of the phrase ‘mess[ing] with parts of the world’ further emphasizes how careful humans must be with delegating tasks to superintelligent machines. Through this, Russel also appeals to the pathos of the reader, whose fear of AI has already been made common by popular media.

The sharp contrast between Russel’s opinion of ‘disastrous’ AI and Mitchell’s opinion of ‘tempered’ AI seem to be almost contradictory. While Russel’s seems to align with many ill-fated popular works of art about AI, Mitchell’s seems to be more optimistic. Another example of a text that reflects Mitchell’s belief that AI will develop with human-like judgment, is Paolo Bacigalupi’s short story called Mika Model.

This story details the experience of a cop, Detective Rivera, who is navigating his responsibility of helping a ‘female’ robot, Mika, to find a lawyer after she killed her owner. Through Detective Rivera’s character, Bacigalupi considers both sides of the AI argument: has their integration into human society allowed them to gain the privileges of thought and emotion, or are those qualities void because of their inorganic nature?

Detective Rivera starts off his interaction with Mika by being cautious of her CPU-controlled brain and synthetic composition. He repeatedly reminds himself that Mika is ‘just a software,’ to which she then comments ‘You don’t think I’m real.’ By the use of the word ‘real’, Bacigalupi questions what we humans consider as ‘real’. Is real something you can touch and see, or is it something to which we offer the privilege of our empathy? Even though Mika looks, behaves, and even ‘smells’ like a normal human, the juxtaposition of ‘real’ with ‘software’ here highlights the barrier of wires versus veins, and inorganic versus organic.

Over the course of a car ride, Detective Rivera starts to see many similarities between Mika and girls he used to know in the past. He was able to clearly read Mika’s emotions, and even felt guilty when he upset her, as he says ‘she looked devastated’, and ‘I felt like an ass.’ Here Bacigalupi discusses emotions, something widely considered to be a very “human” characteristic, to suggest that Mika, the robot, might really be closer to “human” than initially thought. He then compares Mika’s initial code (her ‘year zero protocol’) to Detective Rivera’s genetic code (DNA from his parents) to again draw similarities between them. Additionally Mika’s ‘self software update’ is compared to Detective Rivera’s daily ‘learning’ to further highlight the parallels between artificial intelligence and humans.

Bacigalupi also discusses Russel’s rather cautious view of AI through the viewpoint of other characters like the company legal counsel, Holly. Russel’s view of the need for humans to be very careful while creating AI is represented in this short story: despite the adversities faced by Mika, she does in fact put her objectives over those of her owner when she kills him. Through the character of Holly, Bacigalupi forces the readers to consider the factual reality that Mika is ‘just a malfunctioning bot.’

Using Holly to paint her as a highly intelligent software that ‘manipulates’ Detective Rivera, Bacigalupi points out Mika’s artificial or ‘fake’ feelings that she fabricated to simply further her own objectives. Additionally, by the use of the word ‘manipulate’ to describe Mika’s actions, the notion of a pre-programmed, calculated move is further emphasized. Through using Holly to describe Mika’s action as the result of complex software programming rather than emotion, Bacigalupi again conveys that her ‘manipulation’ of Detective Rivera, or even the murder of her owner wasn’t due to spite, hatred, or fear, but simply due to a ‘software malfunction.’

Lastly, describing Mika’s eventual ‘murder’ as a ‘hardware deactivation’ brings the empathetic readers back to the harsh reality that Mika is in fact just a computer. Towards the end of this story, while Detective Rivera’s appalment is reflective of Mitchell’s view of AI being ‘tempered in social judgment,’ Holly’s impactful action and dialogue forces the readers to be reminded of the intent behind AI development, and simultaneously, its potential dangers.

While we know too little about AI to justify either Mitchell’s or Russel’s viewpoints, AI’s development might be too complex to adopt only one or the other. As exemplified by Bacigalupi through the characters of Detective Rivera, Holly, and Mika, the complexities and inconsistencies of human opinion might require routine re-evaluation of AI development rules.
